# How to setup SoftiWARP on Ubuntu 18.04 and run an RDMA server-client example 

 **Nove 17th, 2022 updates:** I have also tested these intructions, and setup on the Ubuntu 22 server with 5.15 kernel. I will point out differences where as applicable. 

SoftiWARP is a software RDMA device that attaches with the active network cards to enable RDMA programming. For anyone starting with RDMA programming, RDMA-enabled hardware might not be at hand. SoftiWARP is a very useful tool to setup the RDMA environment, and code and experiment with. It is also a very useful tool for education and teaching RDMA programming to students. From SoftiWARP github repo:

SoftiWARP (siw) is a software iWARP kernel driver and user library for Linux. It implements the iWARP protocol suite (MPA/DDP/RDMAP, IETF-RFC 5044/5041/5040) completely in software, without requiring any dedicated RDMA hardware. SoftiWarp targets for integration with the OpenFabrics (OFA) ecosystem. For OFA integration, it is written against its kernel and user level interfaces. SoftiWARP supports both user level and kernel level applications.  It makes use of the OFA connection manager to set up connections. The kernel component runs on top of TCP kernel  sockets.

However, for new starters setting up RDMA programming environment can be a challenging task. In this blog I am to walk through how to setup RDMA and SoftiWARP programming environment with the OFED OFA stack on Linux and run an RDMA server/client code.   

**Note:** In this guide I am not showing how to install kernel modules and libraries, start the RDMA service automatically. I am showing the basic building blocks that are needed/used.  

SoftiWARP is developed and maintained by [Bernard Metzler](https://researcher.watson.ibm.com/researcher/view.php?person=zurich-BMT) at IBM Research in Zurich.
  
 ## Index 
 1. [Setting up RDMA environment](#setting-up-rdma-environment)
     - 1.1 [Basic building environment](#basic-building-environment)
     - 1.2 [Installing userspace libraries and tools](#installing-userspace-libraries-and-tools)
 2. [Building SoftiWARP](#building-softiwarp)     
     - 2.1 [Kernel Module](#kernel-module)
     - 2.2 [Userspace library](#userspace-library)
     - 2.3 [Testing the setup](#testing-the-setup)
 3. [Running an RDMA server-client example](#running-an-rdma-server-client-example)
 4. [Further references for RDMA programming](#further-references-for-rdma-programming)
 5. [Common problems](#common-problems)
 6. [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgments)
 
 ## Setting up RDMA environment 
 
 RDMA programming environment consists of a bunch of kernel modules and userspace libraries. I am going to 
 setup the OFA/OFED RDMA CM programming environment. However, be aware this is not the _only_ way to do 
 RDMA programming.
 
 The following instructions I have tried and tested on an Ubuntu 18.04 LTS installation (on physical as well 
 as in a  VirtualBox image). The kernel version on a fresh Ubuntu 18.04 installation is `4.15`. Before you 
 start you should prepare the environment for building a kernel module and userspace library. 
 

###### Basic building environment  
 ```text
 sudo apt-get install build-essential libelf-dev cmake
 ``` 

 
###### Installing userspace libraries and tools
 
 ```text
sudo apt-get install libibverbs1 libibverbs-dev librdmacm1  librdmacm-dev rdmacm-utils ibverbs-utils
``` 

###### Insert common RDMA kernel modules 
Insert these two modules, and they will pull in the rest of the dependencies (if required). 
```text
sudo modprobe ib_core
sudo modprobe rdma_ucm
```

## Ubuntu-18 Building SoftiWARP 

### Kernel module 

Clone the SoftiWARP source code, checkout the `dev-siw.mem_ext` branch, and then build that branch.    
```text
git clone https://github.com/zrlio/softiwarp.git
cd ./softiwarp/kernel/
git checkout dev-siw.mem_ext
make
```

It should build successfully and you should have `siw.ko` kernel module ready in the build directory. You can insert 
that module now. 

```text
sudo insmod ./siw.ko
``` 

### Userspace library 

###### preparation 
```text
sudo apt-get install libnl-3-dev libnl-route-3-dev pandoc pkg-config
```

###### building userspace libraries 
There is a big uber repo that contains almost all userspace RDMA environment. Building this uber repo is the simplest 
and the straightforward way to get started. If you are feeling a bit adventurous you can cherry pick just `libsiw` 
building too.   

```text
git clone https://github.com/zrlio/softiwarp-user-for-linux-rdma.git
cd ./softiwarp-user-for-linux-rdma/
./build.sh
cd build/
make 
```   

Now we have to setup the $LD_LIBRARY_PATH so that build libraries can be found. $LD_LIBRARY_PATH variable always 
needs to be set with the right library path in your working environment. In the current terminal: 

```text
cd ./softiwarp-user-for-linux-rdma/build/lib/
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$(pwd):$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

or you can add the line in your `.bashrc` profile as `export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=XXX:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH`. Replace `XXX` 
with the path where the libraries are build. Putting in `.bashrc` is a more convenient way. 


At this point you should be able to see RDMA devices in your system by : 

```text
atr@atr:$ ibv_devices
    device          	   node GUID
    ------          	----------------
    siw_enp0s8      	0800275991fb0000
    siw_lo          	7369775f6c6f0000
    siw_enp0s3      	0800273e35690000
atr@atr:$
```

## Ubuntu-22 Getting SoftiWARP 
As of kernel version `5.3` SoftiWARP is part of the mainstream kernel. Hence, it is not needed to compile it from scratch. Just a simple modprobe magic would do. 

```
modprobe siw
```
However, there are new steps how to enable and attach `siw` to an existing interface using the new `rdma` command (equivalent of the `ip` command). 

```
atr@u22:~$ ip addr 
1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
    link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
    inet 127.0.0.1/8 scope host lo
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 ::1/128 scope host 
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
2: enp0s3: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc fq_codel state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 08:00:27:fd:2d:61 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    inet 10.0.2.15/24 metric 100 brd 10.0.2.255 scope global dynamic enp0s3
       valid_lft 85132sec preferred_lft 85132sec
    inet6 fe80::a00:27ff:fefd:2d61/64 scope link 
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
3: enp0s8: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc fq_codel state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 08:00:27:fb:37:4a brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    inet 192.168.56.103/24 brd 192.168.56.255 scope global enp0s8
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 fe80::a00:27ff:fefb:374a/64 scope link 
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
atr@u22:~$ sudo rdma link add siw0 type siw netdev enp0s8 
atr@u22:~$ ibv_devices 
    device          	   node GUID
    ------          	----------------
    siw0            	0a0027fffefb374a
```

At this point you have attached the software RDMA device to the enp0s8 physical device. 


## Testing the setup with `rping` 

rping is like `ping` utility to test the working of an RDMA system. It has two components, a server and a client. 

###### server 
```text
rping -s -a [what_ever_ip_address of the device] 
```

###### client 
```text
rping -c -a [what_ever_ip_address of the device] -v 
``` 

You should see a running output like 
```text

ping data: rdma-ping-0: ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ[\]^_`abcdefghijklmnopqr
ping data: rdma-ping-1: BCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ[\]^_`abcdefghijklmnopqrs
ping data: rdma-ping-2: CDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ[\]^_`abcdefghijklmnopqrst
ping data: rdma-ping-3: DEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ[\]^_`abcdefghijklmnopqrstu

```

## Running an RDMA server-client example 

I wrote a small RDMA server client example to demonstrate the basic `send/recv` and RDMA `read` and `write` 
functionality. The code is available at [https://github.com/animeshtrivedi/rdma-example](https://github.com/animeshtrivedi/rdma-example).
The code contains a lot of comments. Here is the workflow that happens in the example: 

Client: 
  1. setup RDMA resources   
  2. connect to the server 
  3. receive server side buffer information via send/recv exchange 
  4. do an RDMA write to the server buffer from a (first) local buffer. The content of the buffer is the string passed with the `-s` argument. 
  5. do an RDMA read to read the content of the server buffer into a second local buffer. 
  6. compare the content of the first and second buffers, and match them. 
  7. disconnect 

Server: 
  1. setup RDMA resources 
  2. wait for a client to connect 
  3. allocate and pin a server buffer
  4. accept the incoming client connection 
  5. send information about the local server buffer to the client 
  6. wait for disconnect

###### How to run      
```text
git clone https://github.com/animeshtrivedi/rdma-example.git
cd ./rdma-example
cmake .
make
``` 
 
###### server
```text
./bin/rdma_server
```
###### client
```text
atr@atr:~/rdma-example$ ./bin/rdma_client -a 127.0.0.1 -s textstring 
Passed string is : textstring , with count 10 
Trying to connect to server at : 127.0.0.1 port: 20886 
The client is connected successfully 
---------------------------------------------------------
buffer attr, addr: 0x5629832e22c0 , len: 10 , stag : 0x1617b400 
---------------------------------------------------------
...
SUCCESS, source and destination buffers match 
Client resource clean up is complete 
atr@atr:~/rdma-example$ 

```

## Further references for RDMA programming 

  * Chapter 3, Remote Direct Memory Access. End-to-End Considerations in the Unification of High-Performance I/O, PhD thesis, ETH Zurich, January, 2016. [https://doi.org/10.3929/ethz-a-010651949](https://doi.org/10.3929/ethz-a-010651949).
  * RDMAmojo blog has interesting details [https://www.rdmamojo.com/](https://www.rdmamojo.com/) 
  * RDMA programming in Java, DiSNI: Direct Storage and Networking Interface, [https://github.com/zrlio/disni](https://github.com/zrlio/disni).

## Common Problems

Here is a list of common problems. 

#### Invalid kernel module 
```text
insmod: error inserting 'siw.ko': -1 Invalid module format
```
You should `make clean` and rebuild the `siw.ko` module. The module was built for another kernel version and meanwhile
the kernel has been updated. 

#### No devices 
```text
ibv_devices: error while loading shared libraries: libibverbs.so.1: cannot open shared object file: No such file or directory
```

  * Check if the $LD_LIBRARY_PATH is set
  * Check if the libraries are in the path which is set for $LD_LIBRARY_PATH
  * Do `ldconfig` on a newly installed system, so it can learn about new libs 

## Acknowledgements 
SoftiWARP is developed and maintained by [Bernard Metzler](https://researcher.watson.ibm.com/researcher/view.php?person=zurich-BMT) at IBM Research in Zurich.
